Document NFD for GPU Labeling (#44915)
kubernetes/website: content/en/docs/tasks/manage-gpus/scheduling-gpus.md

          gpu-vendor.example/example-gpu: 1 # requesting 1 GPU
```

> ## Clusters containing different types of GPUs

Reviewer: I think we'd want to keep, but modify this heading.  Maybe "Manage clusters with different types of GPUs".  My logic is that this is in the task section and starting headings with a verb, when possible, is best.

I'd also keep the rather generic info from the original L#69-71 because it mentions a simple mechanism for managing the diff devices--labels.  Then, under this heading, identify the original content as "manual":

> ## Manage clusters with different types of GPUs
> 
> If different nodes in your cluster have different types of GPUs, then you
> can use [Node Labels and Node Selectors](/docs/tasks/configure-pod-container/assign-pods-nodes/)
> to schedule pods to appropriate nodes.
> 
> ### Manually labeling nodes
> 
> You can manually apply labels to nodes and then reference the labels in your pod specification to place workloads on the nodes with the specific type of GPU.
> 
> ```console
> # Label your nodes with the accelerator type they have.
> kubectl label nodes node1 accelerator=example-gpu-x100
> kubectl label nodes node2 accelerator=other-gpu-k915
> ```
> 
> That label key `accelerator` is just an example.
> You can use a different label key.

The proposed "Automatically labeling nodes..." heading would need another #, I think.

As and administrator, you can automatically discover and label all your GPU enabled nodes
by deploying the K8S-Sig project Node Feature Discovery [NFD](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/node-feature-discovery).
NFD enables node feature discovery for Kubernetes. 

> It detects hardware features available on each node in a Kubernetes cluster, and advertises those features using node labels and optionally node extended resources, annotations and node taints. 

Reviewer: L#71 doesn't have as much info payload as #72, and I think we can combine:

"NFD detects the hardware features that are available on each node in a Kubernetes cluster and advertises those features. Typically, NFD adds node labels to advertise the features, but NFD can also add extended resources, annotations, and node taints."

> Node Feature Discovery is compatible with any recent version of Kubernetes (v1.21+).

Reviewer: I'll rarely critique using a full project name, but here we've already abbreviated, so I start with "NFD is..."  However, I'd wait to hear from a maintainer about whether and how to mention version information.  The [Versioning Kubernetes examples](https://kubernetes.io/docs/contribute/style/style-guide/#versioning-kubernetes-examples) topic doesn't apply, I don't think.  v1.21 is already EOL, IIUC.

> Administrators can leverage NFD to also taint nodes with specific features, so that only pods that request those features can be scheduled on those nodes.

Reviewer: Hrm, my instinct is to remove this sentence.  I liked that the page was basic--just labels.  But, I don't feel strongly about it and defer to SMEs and the doc maintainers.

Reviewer 2: IMHO it's relevant enough to keep here, and adding link to docs is good also.

PS. NFD taint support is still experimental: https://nfd.sigs.k8s.io/usage/customization-guide#node-tainting

> Once a cluster is labeled with the GPU feature, you can schedule pods on GPU nodes by adding the following to your pod spec:

Reviewer: nit: s/Once/After/ on the principle of "one word, one meaning."  I'd also spell out "specification" but I'm not intimate with the style guidelines.

```yaml
apiVersion: v1
kind: Pod
metadata:
  name: example-vector-add
spec:
  restartPolicy: Never
  containers:
    - name: example-vector-add
      image: "registry.example/example-vector-add:v42"
      resources:
        limits:
          gpu-vendor.example/example-gpu: 1 # requesting 1 GPU
      nodeSelector:

>         gpu-vendor.example/example-gpu: "true"

Reviewer: nitiest nit: how about `gpu-vendor.example/gpu-product: "example-gpu-x100"`?  I feel like a greater difference to L#90 could be helpful.  (Though, I concede that this is an area that is unlikely to cause any confusion. Sigh.)

Author: I prefer to keep it as is, since most of the time the deviceplugin and node label match to make things simpler

```

NFD exposes an API to allow vendors to leverage the automatic labeling functionality. 

> NVIDIA has implemented this API in the [GPU feature discovery](https://github.com/NVIDIA/gpu-feature-discovery/blob/main/README.md).

Reviewer: wordsmithing: "NVIDIA implemented..." most conjugations of "to be" can be omitted.

That label key `accelerator` is just an example; you can use
a different label key if you prefer.

### Automatically labeling nodes with Node Feature Discovery {#node-feature-discovery}

As an administrator, you can automatically discover and label all your GPU enabled nodes
by deploying the K8S-Sig project [Node Feature Discovery](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/node-feature-discovery) (NFD).
NFD detects the hardware features that are available on each node in a Kubernetes cluster and advertises those features.
Typically, NFD adds node labels to advertise the features, but NFD can also add extended resources, annotations, and node taints.
NFD is compatible with any recent version of Kubernetes (v1.21+).

Administrators can leverage NFD to also taint nodes with specific features, so that only pods that request those features can be scheduled on those nodes.
After a cluster is labeled with the GPU feature, you can schedule pods on GPU nodes by adding the following to your pod spec:

```yaml

> apiVersion: v1

Author: You mean adding something like ?

```
#
# CAUTION: this is an example configuration.
#          Do not use this for your own cluster!
#
```

> apiVersion: v1

Reviewer 3: I believe what @sftim was pointing out is there is a "shortcode" that is used to highlight significant parts of a code block.

So if you look at [the raw markdown](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/kubernetes/website/main/content/en/docs/tasks/administer-cluster/encrypt-data.md) for the references above, you can see there is this line:

```txt
{{< highlight yaml "linenos=false,hl_lines=2-5" >}}
```

That is telling the rendering to not include line numbers (not as important) and to highlight lines 2 through 5 in the yaml content. So you could use that to highlight the affinity section that is relevant for selecting the right hosts based on the desired GPU memory and family.

> apiVersion: v1

Author: Oh I see

> apiVersion: v1

Author: I think is done now

kind: Pod
metadata:
  name: example-vector-add
spec:
  restartPolicy: Never
  containers:
    - name: example-vector-add
      image: "registry.example/example-vector-add:v42"
      resources:
        limits:
          gpu-vendor.example/example-gpu: 1 # requesting 1 GPU
      nodeSelector:
        gpu-vendor.example/example-gpu: "true"
```

NFD exposes an API which allows vendors to leverage the automatic labeling functionality. 
NVIDIA has implemented this API in the [GPU feature discovery](https://github.com/NVIDIA/gpu-feature-discovery/blob/main/README.md).

### Using custom labellers

For AMD GPUs, you can use the
[Node Labeller](https://github.com/RadeonOpenCompute/k8s-device-plugin/tree/master/cmd/k8s-node-labeller).
Node Labeller is a {{< glossary_tooltip text="controller" term_id="controller" >}} that automatically

> labels nodes in a Kubernetes cluster with AMD GPU device properties.

Reviewer 2: NFD alone is not enough, one also needs a config with suitable rules.  After quick googling, all 3 vendors' GPU operators would already seem to support NFD at least as optional dependency => I think removing this section is OK.

## Automatic node labelling {#node-labeller}

As an administrator, you can automatically discover and label all your GPU enabled nodes
by deploying Kubernetes [Node Feature Discovery](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/node-feature-discovery) (NFD).
NFD detects the hardware features that are available on each node in a Kubernetes cluster.
Typically, NFD is configured to advertise those features as node labels, but NFD can also add extended resources, annotations, and node taints.
NFD is compatible with all [supported versions](/releases/version-skew-policy/#supported-versions) of Kubernetes.

> 

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
You also need a plugin for NFD that adds labels to your nodes. Your GPU vendor may provide a third party
plugin for NFD; check their documentation for more details.

```

Author: I did some mods to this suggestion please check

Reviewer 2: I did not find any mentions of "NFD plugin" from NFD documentation:  https://kubernetes-sigs.github.io/node-feature-discovery

Whereas NFD release notes mentioned "NFD plugin" to be functionality that NFD provides for `kubelet`.

If "NFD plugin" in above means those "hook" binaries that NFD worker called earlier, that support is disabled by default, and will be removed in next NFD release (due to security reasons), so I think some better term could be used.

Something like this sounds a bit too much though:
> NFD alone does not label nodes, example here requires additional vendor support, either NFD configuration specifying device matching rules it will use for labeling, or additional component directly providing NFD node worker list of labels.

Administrators can leverage NFD to also taint nodes with specific features, so that only pods that request those features can be scheduled on those nodes.
After a cluster is labeled with the GPU feature, you can schedule pods on GPU nodes by adding the following to your pod spec:

> {{< highlight yaml "linenos=false,hl_lines=2-5" >}}

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
{{< highlight yaml "linenos=false,hl_lines=6-20" >}}
```

plugin for NFD; check their documentation for more details.

> {{< highlight yaml "linenos=false,hl_lines=6-20" >}}

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
{{< highlight yaml "linenos=false,hl_lines=6-18" >}}
```

  name: example-vector-add
spec:
  # You can use Kubernetes node affinity to schedule this Pod onto a node
  # that provides the kind of GPU that its container needs in order to work
  affinity:
    nodeAffinity:
      requiredDuringSchedulingIgnoredDuringExecution:
        nodeSelectorTerms:
        - matchExpressions:
          - key: "gpu.gpu-vendor.example/installed-memory"
            operator: Gt # (greater than)
            values: ["40535"]
          - key: "gpu.gpu-vendor.example/family"
            operator: In
            values:
            - Helium # example product family
            - Neon   # example product family

>   restartPolicy: Never

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
  restartPolicy: OnFailure
```
to match the earlier example.

  containers:
    - name: example-vector-add
      image: "registry.example/example-vector-add:v42"
      resources:
        limits:
          gpu-vendor.example/example-gpu: 1 # requesting 1 GPU

> {{< /highlight >}}

Reviewer 5: This seems to just be an extension of the example above, with the added affinity section, correct?

However, from reading the docs top-to-bottom, this implies that a label called `gpu.gpu-vendor.example/installed-memory`will somehow magically be added to the node by NFD (which isn't true, an NFD plugin is needed to add this).

We should extend the text to make it clear that an NFD plugin is needed (in addition to NFD itself) in order to provide any vendor specific labels.

Author: How about now?

#### GPU vendor implementations

- [NVIDIA](https://github.com/NVIDIA/gpu-feature-discovery/#readme).

> - [INTEL](https://github.com/intel/intel-device-plugins-for-kubernetes).

Reviewer 3: nit: NVIDIA's actual name is in all caps, but Intel is normal cased, so it would be good to just have it be Intel and not shout INTEL. :)

Author: My bad, use of habit

> - [NVIDIA](https://github.com/NVIDIA/gpu-feature-discovery/#readme).
> - [Intel](https://github.com/intel/intel-device-plugins-for-kubernetes).

Reviewer 4: Alphabetical order please
```suggestion

These vendors provide labelling implementations that integrate with NFD for GPU hardware discovery:

- [Intel](https://github.com/intel/intel-device-plugins-for-kubernetes).
- [NVIDIA](https://github.com/NVIDIA/gpu-feature-discovery/#readme).
```

Reviewer 2: As this is only about GPUs, it's better to refer directly to Intel GPU plugin documentation: https://intel.github.io/intel-device-plugins-for-kubernetes/cmd/gpu_plugin/README.html

> - [Intel](https://intel.github.io/intel-device-plugins-for-kubernetes/cmd/gpu_plugin/README.html).

Reviewer 3: nit - only if you need to do another update for a more compelling reason: I would remove the period from the end of these bullet items since it is just a list of the names/hyperlinks.

Author: I always had the question of wetter to end or not with a `.` on MD lists 
Thanks!

## Automatic node labelling {#node-labeller}

As an administrator, you can automatically discover and label all your GPU enabled nodes
by deploying Kubernetes [Node Feature Discovery](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/node-feature-discovery) (NFD).
NFD detects the hardware features that are available on each node in a Kubernetes cluster.
Typically, NFD is configured to advertise those features as node labels, but NFD can also add extended resources, annotations, and node taints.
NFD is compatible with all [supported versions](/releases/version-skew-policy/#supported-versions) of Kubernetes.

Administrators can leverage NFD to also taint nodes with specific features, so that only pods that request those features can be scheduled on those nodes.
After a cluster is labeled with the GPU feature, you can schedule pods on GPU nodes by adding the following to your pod spec:

```yaml

> #
> # CAUTION: this is an example Pod.
> #          Do not use this for your own cluster!
> #

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
```

apiVersion: v1
kind: Pod
metadata:
  name: example-vector-add
spec:

>   # You can then use Kubernetes node affinity to schedule pods on GPU nodes.
>   # https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/scheduling-eviction/assign-pod-node/#node-affinity

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
  # You can use Kubernetes node affinity to schedule this Pod onto a node
  # that provides the kind of GPU that its container needs in order to work
```

## Automatic node labelling {#node-labeller}

As an administrator, you can automatically discover and label all your GPU enabled nodes
by deploying Kubernetes [Node Feature Discovery](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/node-feature-discovery) (NFD).

> NFD detects the hardware features that are available on each node in a Kubernetes cluster and advertises those features.
> Typically, NFD adds node labels to advertise the features, but NFD can also add extended resources, annotations, and node taints.

Reviewer 2: Maybe:
```suggestion
NFD detects the hardware features that are available on each node in a Kubernetes cluster.
Typically, NFD is configured to advertise those features as node labels, but NFD can also add extended resources, annotations, and node taints.
```

spec:
  # You can then use Kubernetes node affinity to schedule pods on GPU nodes.
  # https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/scheduling-eviction/assign-pod-node/#node-affinity
  affinity:
    nodeAffinity:
      requiredDuringSchedulingIgnoredDuringExecution:
        nodeSelectorTerms:
        - matchExpressions:
          - key: "gpu.gpu-vendor.example/installed-memory"
            operator: Gt
            values: ["40535"]
          - key: "gpu.gpu-vendor.example/family"
            operator: In
            values:  # examples are GCU families not GPU families 😉
            - arbitrary
            - armchair-traveller
            - just-read-the-instructions
            - steely-glint
  restartPolicy: Never
  containers:
    - name: example-vector-add
      image: "registry.example/example-vector-add:v42"
      resources:
        limits:
          gpu-vendor.example/example-gpu: 1 # requesting 1 GPU
      nodeSelector:
      # Use Kubernetes node selector to schedule pods on GPU nodes.
      # https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/scheduling-eviction/assign-pod-node/#nodeselector
        gpu-vendor.example/example-gpu-present: "true" 
```

#### GPU vendor implementations

> - NVIDIA [GPU feature discovery](https://github.com/NVIDIA/gpu-feature-discovery/#readme).

Reviewer 2: List both AMD & NVIDIA implementations, or neither, don't remove just one.

(Intel has used NFD from start, so it's not relevant here.)

Author: AMD doesn't implement NFD, they have a custom `node-labeller` that doesn't leverage NFD api.

Author: https://github.com/ROCm/k8s-device-plugin/tree/master/cmd/k8s-node-labeller , is a sub component of their device plugin implementation

Author: Should it still be included then?

Reviewer 2: > AMD doesn't implement NFD, they have a custom `node-labeller` that doesn't leverage NFD api.

How such implementation detail is relevant to users i.e. which custom labeling solutions this section should list?

Reviewer 4: > List both AMD & NVIDIA implementations, or neither, don't remove just one.

That's not Kubernetes' policy; please disregard this suggestion @ArangoGutierrez.

Author: So only list projects that leverage NFD API?

Reviewer 4: Yep, exactly that.

Typically, NFD is configured to advertise those features as node labels, but NFD can also add extended resources, annotations, and node taints.
NFD is compatible with all [supported versions](/releases/version-skew-policy/#supported-versions) of Kubernetes.

Administrators can leverage NFD to also taint nodes with specific features, so that only pods that request those features can be scheduled on those nodes.
After a cluster is labeled with the GPU feature, you can schedule pods on GPU nodes by adding the following to your pod spec:

```yaml
apiVersion: v1
kind: Pod
metadata:
  name: example-vector-add
spec:
  # You can then use Kubernetes node affinity to schedule pods on GPU nodes.
  # https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/scheduling-eviction/assign-pod-node/#node-affinity
  affinity:
    nodeAffinity:
      requiredDuringSchedulingIgnoredDuringExecution:
        nodeSelectorTerms:
        - matchExpressions:
          - key: "gpu.gpu-vendor.example/installed-memory"
            operator: Gt
            values: ["40535"]
          - key: "gpu.gpu-vendor.example/family"
            operator: In

>             values:  # examples are GCU families not GPU families 😉
>             - arbitrary
>             - armchair-traveller
>             - just-read-the-instructions
>             - steely-glint

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
            values:
            - Helium # example product family
            - Neon   # example product family
```

  restartPolicy: Never
  containers:
    - name: example-vector-add
      image: "registry.example/example-vector-add:v42"
      resources:
        limits:
          gpu-vendor.example/example-gpu: 1 # requesting 1 GPU

>       nodeSelector:
>       # Use Kubernetes node selector to schedule pods on GPU nodes.
>       # https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/scheduling-eviction/assign-pod-node/#nodeselector
>         gpu-vendor.example/example-gpu-present: "true" 

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
```

```

#### GPU vendor implementations

> 

Reviewer 4: Is there an Intel implementation? If so, we should add a link (the entries are sorted alphabetically).

Author: K8s-sig/NFD main contributors are INTEL and NVIDIA. For very specific vendored labels NVIDIA uses the gpu-feature-discovery sidecar, which calls to NFD API to generate `nvidia.com/` labels.
For all INTEL features, NFD generates them with `feature.node.kubernetes.io/cpu-cpuid.ADX` as example.

Author: is there a GFD version at INTEL @marquiz  ??

Reviewer 6: It's the Intel device plugins for kubernetes (https://github.com/intel/intel-device-plugins-for-kubernetes) that's I think already linked above. Anything to add @eero-t ?

Reviewer 4: Please list it here too, if it works as a plugin to NFD.

Reviewer 2: I'm not sure what the above mentioned "NFD API" or "plugin to NFD" (vendor specific fork of NFD worker?) mean, as NFD is configured through NFD label/etc rules and runtime-provided feature (config) file(s) provided to the per-node NFD workers.

Intel uses following:
* Intel device plugins project has NFD config rules for device plugin DaemonSets: https://github.com/intel/intel-device-plugins-for-kubernetes/tree/main/deployments/nfd/overlays/node-feature-rules/
* Deployed GPU plugin will then provide NFD feature file for additional, more targeted labels [1]: https://github.com/intel/intel-device-plugins-for-kubernetes/blob/main/cmd/gpu_plugin/labels.md

[1] These labels were earlier provided by (deprecated) GPU plugin init container NFD hook binary [2], but hooking support will be removed in next NFD version [3].

[2] https://intel.github.io/intel-device-plugins-for-kubernetes/cmd/gpu_nfdhook/README.html

[3] https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/node-feature-discovery/issues/856

- NVIDIA [GPU feature discovery](https://github.com/NVIDIA/gpu-feature-discovery/#readme).

> - AMD [k8s-node-labeller](https://github.com/ROCm/k8s-device-plugin/tree/master/cmd/k8s-node-labeller).

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
```
